2.1 Registers and states

This first section of the chapter concerns registers and states. A register is an abstraction of a physical device in which quantum information may be stored, and the state of a register represents a description of its contents at a particular instant.

2.1.1 Registers and classical state sets

The term register is intended to be suggestive of a computer component in which some finite amount of data can be stored and manipulated. While this is a reasonable picture to keep in mind, it should be understood that any physical system in which a finite amount of data may be stored, and whose state may change over time, could be modeled as a register. For example, a register could represent a medium used to transmit information from a sender to a receiver. At an intuitive level, what is most important is that registers represent mathematical abstractions of physical objects, or parts of physical objects, that store information.

Definition of registers

The following formal definition of a register is intended to capture a basic but nevertheless important idea, which is that multiple registers may be viewed collectively as forming a single register. It is natural to choose an inductive definition for this reason.

> **Definition 2.1** A register  $X$  is either one of the following two objects: 1\. An alphabet  $\Sigma$ . 2\. An n-tuple  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$ , where  $n$  is a positive integer and  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  are registers.

Registers of the first type are called **simple registers** and registers of the second type are called **compound registers** when it is helpful to distinguish them. In the case of a simple register  $X=\Sigma$ , the alphabet  $\Sigma$  represents the set of classical states that the register may store. The classical state set associated with a compound register will be specified shortly. As is suggested by the definition, registers will be denoted by capital letters in a sans serif font, such as  $X$ ,  $Y$ , and  $Z$ . Sometimes registers will be subscripted, such as  $X_{1},…,X_{n}$ , when it is necessary to refer to a variable number of registers or convenient to name them in this way for some other reason.

Based on Definition 2.1, one may naturally identify a tree structure with a given register, with each leaf node corresponding to a simple register. A register  $Y$  is said to be a **subregister** of  $X$  if the tree associated with  $Y$  is a subtree of the tree associated with  $X$ .

> **Example 2.2** Define registers  $X$ ,  $Y_{0}$ ,  $Y_{1}$ ,  $Z_{1}$ ,  $Z_{2}$ , and  $Z_{3}$ , as follows:
>
> $$
> X=\left(Y_{0},Y_{1}\right),
> $$
>
> $$
> Y_{0}=\left{1,2,3,4\right}
> $$
>
> $$
> Y_{1}=\left(Z_{1},Z_{2},Z_{3}\right),
> $$
>
> $$
> Z_{1}=\left{0,1\right},
> $$
>
> $$
> Z_{2}=\left{0,1\right},
> $$
>
> $$
> Z_{3}=\left{0,1\right}.
> $$
>
> The tree associated with the register  $X$  is illustrated in Figure 2.1. The subregisters of  $X$  include  $Y_{0}$ ,  $Y_{1}$ ,  $Z_{1}$ ,  $Z_{2}$ ,  $Z_{3}$  and (trivially)  $X$  itself.

The classical state set of a register

Every register has associated with it a classical state set, as specified by the following definition.

> **Definition 2.3** The classical state set of a register  $X$  is determined as follows: 1\. If  $X=\Sigma$  is a simple register, the classical state set of  $X$  is  $\Sigma$ . 2\. If  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  is a compound register, the classical state set of  $X$  is the Cartesian product
>
> $$
> \Sigma =\Gamma _{1}\times ⋯\times \Gamma _{n},
> $$
>
> where  $\Gamma _{k}$  denotes the classical state set associated with the register  $Y_{k}$  for each  $k\in \left{1,…,n\right}$ .

Elements of a register's classical state set are called **classical states** of that register. The term classical state is intended to be suggestive of the classical notion of a state in computer science. Intuitively speaking, a classical state of a register can be recognized unambiguously, like the values 0 and 1 stored by a single bit memory component. The term classical state should not be confused with the term **state**, which by default will mean **quantum state** rather than classical state throughout this book.

A register is said to be **trivial** if its classical state set contains just a single element. While trivial registers are useless from the viewpoint of information processing, it is mathematically convenient to allow for this possibility. The reader will note, however, that registers with empty classical state sets are disallowed by the definition. This is consistent with the idea that registers represent physical systems; while it is possible that a physical system could have just one possible classical state, it is nonsensical for a system to have no states whatsoever.

Reductions of classical states

There is a straightforward way in which each classical state of a register uniquely determines a classical state for each of its subregisters. To be more precise, suppose that

$$
X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)
$$

is a compound register. Let  $\Gamma _{1},…,\Gamma _{n}$  denote the classical state sets of the registers  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$ , respectively, so that the classical state set of  $X$  is equal to  $\Sigma =\Gamma _{1}\times ⋯\times \Gamma _{n}$ . A given classical state  $a=\left(b_{1},…,b_{n}\right)$  of  $X$  then determines that the classical state of  $Y_{k}$  is  $b_{k}\in \Gamma _{k}$ , for each  $k\in \left{1,…,n\right}$ . By applying this definition recursively, one defines a unique classical state of each subregister of  $X$ .

Conversely, the classical state of any register is uniquely determined by the classical states of its simple subregisters. Every classical state of a given register  $X$  therefore uniquely determines a classical state of any register whose simple subregisters form a subset of those of  $X$ . For instance, if  $X$  takes the form (2.3), then one may wish to consider a new register

$$
Z=\left(Y_{k_{1}},…,Y_{k_{m}}\right)
$$

for some choice of indices  $1\le k_{1}<⋯<k_{m}\le n$ . If  $a=\left(b_{1},…,b_{n}\right)$  is the classical state of  $X$  at a particular moment, then the corresponding state of  $Z$  is  $\left(b_{k_{1}},…,b_{k_{m}}\right)$ .

2.1.2 Quantum states of registers

Quantum states, as they will be presented in this book, may be viewed as being analogous to probabilistic states, with which the reader is assumed to have some familiarity.

Probabilistic states of registers

A probabilistic state of a register  $X$  refers to a probability distribution, or random mixture, over the classical states of that register. Assuming the classical state set of  $X$  is  $\Sigma$ , a probabilistic state of  $X$  is identified with a probability vector  $p\in P\left(\Sigma \right)$ ; the value  $p\left(a\right)$  represents the probability associated with a given classical state  $a\in \Sigma$ . It is typical that one views a probabilistic state as being a mathematical representation of the contents of a register, or of a hypothetical individual's knowledge of the contents of a register, at a particular moment.

The difference between probabilistic states and quantum states is that, whereas probabilistic states are represented by probability vectors, quantum states are represented by **density operators** (q.v. Section 1.1.2). Unlike the notion of a probabilistic state, which has a relatively clear and intuitive meaning, the notion of a quantum state can seem non-intuitive. While it is both natural and interesting to seek an understanding of why Nature appears to be well-modeled by quantum states in certain regimes, this book will not attempt to provide such an understanding: quantum states will be considered as mathematical objects and nothing more.

The complex Euclidean space associated with a register

It is helpful to introduce the following terminology to discuss quantum states in mathematical terms.

> **Definition 2.4** The complex Euclidean space associated with a register  $X$  is defined to be  $C^{\Sigma }$ , for  $\Sigma$  being the classical state set of  $X$ .

The complex Euclidean space associated with a given register will be denoted by the same letter as the register itself, but with a scripted font rather than a sans serif font. For example, the complex Euclidean space associated with a register  $X$  will be denoted  $X$ , and the spaces associated with registers  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  will be denoted  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$ .

The reader will note that the complex Euclidean space  $X$  associated with a compound register  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  is given by the tensor product

$$
X=Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n}.
$$

This fact follows directly from the definition stating that the classical state set of  $X$  is given by  $\Sigma =\Gamma _{1}\times ⋯\times \Gamma _{n}$ , assuming that the classical state sets of  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  are  $\Gamma _{1},…,\Gamma _{n}$ , respectively; one has that the complex Euclidean space associated with  $X$  is

$$
X=C^{\Sigma }=C^{\Gamma _{1}\times ⋯\times \Gamma _{n}}=Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n}
$$

for  $Y_{1}=C^{\Gamma _{1}},…,Y_{n}=C^{\Gamma _{n}}$ .

Definition of quantum states

As stated above, quantum states are represented by density operators. The following definition makes this precise.

> **Definition 2.5** A quantum state is a density operator of the form  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  for some choice of a complex Euclidean space  $X$ .

When one refers to a quantum state of a register  $X$ , it is to be understood that the state in question takes the form  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  for  $X$  being the complex Euclidean space associated with  $X$ . It is common that the term **state** is used in place of **quantum state** in the setting of quantum information, because it is the default assumption that one is primarily concerned with quantum states (as opposed to classical states and probabilistic states) in this setting.

Convex combinations of quantum states

For every complex Euclidean space  $X$ , the set  $D\left(X\right)$  is a convex set. For any choice of an alphabet  $\Gamma$ , a collection

$$
\left{\rho _{a}:a\in \Gamma \right}\subseteq D\left(X\right)
$$

of quantum states, and a probability vector  $p\in P\left(\Gamma \right)$ , it therefore holds that the convex combination

$$
\rho =\sum_{a\in \Gamma } p\left(a\right)\rho _{a}
$$

is an element of  $D\left(X\right)$ . The state  $\rho$  defined by the equation (2.8) is said to be a **mixture** of the states  $\left{\rho _{a}:a\in \Gamma \right}$  according to the probability vector  $p$ .

Suppose that  $X$  is a register whose associated complex Euclidean space is  $X$ . It is taken as an axiom that a random selection of  $a\in \Gamma$  according to the probability vector  $p$ , followed by a preparation of  $X$  in the state  $\rho _{a}$ , results in  $X$  being in the state  $\rho$  defined in (2.8). More succinctly, random selections of quantum states are assumed to be represented by convex combinations of density operators.

Ensembles of quantum states

The notion of a probability distribution over a finite set of quantum states arises frequently in the theory of quantum information. A distribution of the form described above may be succinctly represented by a function

$$
\eta :\Gamma →Pos\left(X\right)
$$

satisfying the constraint

$$
Tr\left(\sum_{a\in \Gamma } \eta \left(a\right)\right)=1.
$$

A function  $\eta$  of this sort is called an **ensemble of states**. The interpretation of an ensemble of states  $\eta :\Gamma →Pos\left(X\right)$  is that, for each element  $a\in \Gamma$ , the operator  $\eta \left(a\right)$  represents a state together with the probability associated with that state: the probability is  $Tr\left(\eta \left(a\right)\right)$ , while the state is

$$
\rho _{a}=\frac{\eta \left(a\right)}{Tr\left(\eta \left(a\right)\right)}.
$$

(The operator  $\rho _{a}$  is, of course, determined only when  $\eta \left(a\right)\left[cite_{s}tart\right]\ne 0$ . In the case that  $\eta \left(a\right)=0$  for some choice of  $a$ , one does not generally need to specify a specific density operator  $\rho _{a}$ , as it corresponds to a discrete event that occurs with probability zero.)

Pure states

A quantum state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  is said to be a **pure state** if it has rank equal to 1. Equivalently,  $\rho$  is a pure state if there exists a unit vector  $u\in X$  such that

$$
\rho =uu^{\ast }.
$$

It follows from the spectral theorem (Corollary 1.4) that every quantum state is a mixture of pure quantum states, and moreover that a state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  is pure if and only if it is an extreme point of the set  $D\left(X\right)$ .

It is common that one refers to the pure state (2.12) simply as  $u$ , rather than  $uu^{\ast }$ . There is an ambiguity that arises in following this convention: if one considers two unit vectors  $u$  and  $v=\alpha u$  for any choice of  $\alpha \in C$  with  $∣\alpha ∣\left[cite_{s}tart\right]=1$ , then their corresponding pure states  $uu^{\ast }$  and  $vv^{\ast }$  are equal, as

$$
vv^{\ast }=∣\alpha ∣^{2}uu^{\ast }=uu^{\ast }.
$$

Fortunately, this convention does not generally cause confusion; it must simply be kept in mind that every pure state corresponds to an equivalence class of unit vectors, where  $u$  and  $v$  are equivalent if and only if  $v=\alpha u$  for some choice of  $\alpha \in C$  with  $∣\alpha ∣\left[cite_{s}tart\right]=1$ , and that any particular unit vector may be viewed as being a representative of a pure state from this equivalence class.

Flat states

A quantum state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  is said to be a **flat state** if it holds that

$$
\rho =\frac{\Pi }{Tr\left(\Pi \right)}
$$

for a nonzero projection operator  $\Pi \in Proj\left(X\right)$ . The symbol  $\omega$  will often be used to denote a flat state, and the notation

$$
\omega _{V}=\frac{\Pi _{V}}{Tr\left(\Pi _{V}\right)}
$$

is sometimes used to denote the flat state proportional to the projection  $\Pi _{V}$  onto a nonzero subspace  $V\subseteq X$ . Specific examples of flat states include pure states, which correspond to the case that  $\Pi$  is a rank-one projection, and the **completely mixed state**

$$
\omega =\frac{I_{X}}{dim\left(X\right)}.
$$

Intuitively speaking, the completely mixed state represents the state of complete ignorance, analogous to a uniform probabilistic state.

Classical states and probabilistic states as quantum states

Suppose  $X$  is a register and  $\Sigma$  is the classical state set of  $X$ , so that the complex Euclidean space associated with  $X$  is  $X=C^{\Sigma }$ . Within the set  $D\left(X\right)$  of states of  $X$ , one may represent the possible classical states of  $X$  in the following simple way: the operator  $E_{a,a}\in D\left(X\right)$  is taken as a representation of the register  $X$  being in the classical state  $a$ , for each  $a\in \Sigma$ . Through this association, probabilistic states of registers correspond to diagonal density operators, with each probabilistic state  $p\in P\left(\Sigma \right)$  being represented by the density operator

$$
\sum_{a\in \Sigma } p\left(a\right)E_{a,a}=Diag\left(p\right).
$$

In this way, the set of probabilistic states of a given register form a subset of the set of all quantum states of that register (with the containment being proper unless the register is trivial).

Within some contexts, it may be necessary or appropriate to specify that one or more registers are **classical registers**. Informally speaking, a classical register is one whose states are restricted to being diagonal density operators, corresponding to a classical (probabilistic) states as just described. A more formal and precise meaning of this terminology must be postponed until the section on quantum channels following this one.

Product states

Suppose  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  is a compound register. A state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  is said to be a **product state** of  $X$  if it takes the form

$$
\rho =\sigma _{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes \sigma _{n}
$$

for  $\sigma _{1}\in D\left(Y_{1}\right),…,\sigma _{n}\in D\left(Y_{n}\right)$  being states of  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$ , respectively. Product states represent independence among the states of registers, and when the compound register  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  is in a product state  $\rho$  of the form (2.18), the registers  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  are said to be **independent**. When it is not the case that  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  are independent, they are said to be **correlated**.

> **Example 2.6** Consider a compound register of the form  $X=\left(Y,Z\right)$ , for  $Y$  and  $Z$  being registers sharing the classical state set  $\left{0,1\right}$ . (Registers having the classical state set  $\left{0,1\right}$  are typically called **qubits**, which is short for quantum bits.)
>
> The state  $\rho \in D\left(Y\otimes Z\right)$  defined as
>
> $$
> \rho =\frac{1}{4}E_{0,0}\otimes E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{4}E_{0,0}\otimes E_{1,1}+\frac{1}{4}E_{1,1}\otimes E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{4}E_{1,1}\otimes E_{1,1}
> $$
>
> is an example of a product state, as one may write
>
> $$
> \rho =\left(\frac{1}{2}E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{2}E_{1,1}\right)\otimes \left(\frac{1}{2}E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{2}E_{1,1}\right).
> $$
>
> Equivalently, in matrix form, one has
>
> $$
> \rho =\left​\frac{1}{4}000​0\frac{1}{4}00​00\frac{1}{4}0​000\frac{1}{4}​\right​=\left(\frac{1}{2}0​0\frac{1}{2}​\right)\otimes \left(\frac{1}{2}0​0\frac{1}{2}​\right).
> $$
>
> The states  $\sigma ,\tau \in D\left(Y\otimes Z\right)$  defined as
>
> $$
> \sigma =\frac{1}{2}E_{0,0}\otimes E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{2}E_{1,1}\otimes E_{1,1}
> $$
>
> $$
> \tau =\frac{1}{2}E_{0,0}\otimes E_{0,0}+\frac{1}{2}E_{0,1}\otimes E_{0,1}+\frac{1}{2}E_{1,0}\otimes E_{1,0}+\frac{1}{2}E_{1,1}\otimes E_{1,1}
> $$
>
> are examples of states that are not product states, as they cannot be written as tensor products, and therefore represent correlations between the registers  $Y$  and  $Z$ . In matrix form, these states are as follows:
>
> $$
> \sigma =\left​\frac{1}{2}000​0000​0000​000\frac{1}{2}​\right​,\tau =\left​\frac{1}{2}00\frac{1}{2}​0000​0000​\frac{1}{2}00\frac{1}{2}​\right​.
> $$
>
> The states  $\rho$  and  $\sigma$  are diagonal, so they correspond to probabilistic states; $\rho$  represents the situation in which  $Y$  and  $Z$  store independent random bits, while  $\sigma$  represents the situation in which  $Y$  and  $Z$  store perfectly correlated random bits. The state  $\tau$  does not represent a probabilistic state, and more specifically is an example of an **entangled state**. Entanglement is a particular type of correlation having great significance in quantum information theory, and is the primary focus of Chapter 6.

Bases of density operators

It is an elementary fact, but nevertheless a useful one, that for every complex Euclidean space  $X$  there exist spanning sets of the space  $L\left(X\right)$  consisting only of density operators. One implication of this fact is that every linear mapping of the form

$$
\varphi :L\left(X\right)→C
$$

is uniquely determined by its action on the elements of  $D\left(X\right)$ . This implies, for instance, that channels and measurements are uniquely determined by their actions on density operators. The following example describes one way of constructing such a spanning set.

> **Example 2.7** Let  $\Sigma$  be an alphabet, and assume that a total ordering has been defined on  $\Sigma$ . For every pair  $\left(a,b\right)\in \Sigma \times \Sigma$ , define a density operator  $\rho _{a,b}\in D\left(C^{\Sigma }\right)$  as follows:
>
> $$
> \rho _{a,b}=\left⎩\left⎨\left⎧\left​E_{a,a}\frac{1}{2}\left(e_{a}+e_{b}\right)\left(e_{a}+e_{b}\right)^{\ast }\frac{1}{2}\left(e_{a}+ie_{b}\right)\left(e_{a}+ie_{b}\right)^{\ast }​if a=bif a<bif a>b.\left[cite_{s}tart\right]​
> $$
>
> For each pair  $\left(a,b\right)\in \Sigma \times \Sigma$  with  $a<b$ , one has
>
> $$
> \left(\rho _{a,b}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{a,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{b,b}\right)−i\left(\rho _{b,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{a,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{b,b}\right)=E_{a,b};
> $$
>
> $$
> \left(\rho _{a,b}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{a,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{b,b}\right)+i\left(\rho _{b,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{a,a}−\frac{1}{2}\rho _{b,b}\right)=E_{b,a},
> $$
>
> and from these equations it follows that
>
> $$
> span\left{\rho _{a,b}:\left(a,b\right)\in \Sigma \times \Sigma \right}=L\left(C^{\Sigma }\right).
> $$

2.1.3 Reductions and purifications of quantum states

One may consider a register obtained by removing one or more subregisters from a given compound register. The quantum state of any register that results from this process, viewed in isolation from the subregisters that were removed, is uniquely determined by the state of the original compound register. This section explains how such states are determined. The special case in which the original compound register is in a pure state is particularly important, and is discussed in detail.

The partial trace and reductions of quantum states

Let  $X=\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  be a compound register, for  $n\ge 2$ . For any choice of  $k\in \left{1,…,n\right}$ , one may form a new register

$$
\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{k−1},Y_{k+1},…,Y_{n}\right)
$$

by removing the register  $Y_{k}$  from  $X$  and leaving the remaining registers untouched. For every state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  of  $X$ , the state of the register (2.29) that is determined by this process is called the **reduction** of  $\rho$  to the register (2.29), and is denoted  $\rho \left[Y_{1},…,Y_{k−1},Y_{k+1},…,Y_{n}\right]$ . This state is defined as

$$
\rho \left[Y_{1},…,Y_{k−1},Y_{k+1},…,Y_{n}\right]=Tr_{Y_{k}}\left(\rho \right),
$$

where

$$
Tr_{Y_{k}}\in T\left(Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n},Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{k−1}\otimes Y_{k+1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n}\right)
$$

denotes the **partial trace mapping** (q.v. Section 1.1.2). This is the unique linear mapping that satisfies the equation

$$
Tr_{Y_{k}}\left(Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n}\right)=Tr\left(Y_{k}\right)Y_{1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{k−1}\otimes Y_{k+1}\otimes ⋯\otimes Y_{n}
$$

for all operators  $Y_{1}\in L\left(Y_{1}\right),…,Y_{n}\in L\left(Y_{n}\right)$ . Alternately, one may define

$$
Tr_{Y_{k}}=I_{L\left(Y_{1}\right)}\otimes ⋯\otimes I_{L\left(Y_{k−1}\right)}\otimes Tr\otimes I_{L\left(Y_{k+1}\right)}\otimes ⋯\otimes I_{L\left(Y_{n}\right)};
$$

where it is to be understood that the trace mapping on the right-hand side of this equation acts on  $L\left(Y_{k}\right)$ .

If the classical state sets of  $Y_{1},…,Y_{n}$  are  $\Gamma _{1},…,\Gamma _{n}$ , respectively, one may write the  $\left(\left(a_{1},…,a_{k−1},a_{k+1},…,a_{n}\right),\left(b_{1},…,b_{k−1},b_{k+1},…,b_{n}\right)\right)$  entry of the state  $\rho \left[Y_{1},…,Y_{k−1},Y_{k+1},…,Y_{n}\right]$  explicitly as

$$
\sum_{c\in \Gamma _{k}} \rho \left(\left(a_{1},…,a_{k−1},c,a_{k+1},…,a_{n}\right),\left(b_{1},…,b_{k−1},c,b_{k+1},…,b_{n}\right)\right)
$$

for each choice of  $a_{j},b_{j}\in \Gamma _{j}$  and  $j$  ranging over the set  $\left{1,…,n\right}\setminus \left{k\right}$ .

> **Example 2.8** Let  $Y$  and  $Z$  be registers, both having the classical state set  $\Sigma$ , let  $X=\left(Y,Z\right)$ , and let  $u\in X=Y\otimes Z$  be defined as
>
> $$
> u=\frac{1}{\sqrt{∣\Sigma ∣}}\sum_{a\in \Sigma } e_{a}\otimes e_{a},
> $$
>
> so that
>
> $$
> uu^{\ast }=\frac{1}{∣\Sigma ∣}\sum_{a,b\in \Sigma } E_{a,b}\otimes E_{a,b}.
> $$
>
> It holds that
>
> $$
> \left(uu^{\ast }\right)\left[Y\right]=\frac{1}{∣\Sigma ∣}\sum_{a,b\in \Sigma } Tr\left(E_{a,b}\right)E_{a,b}=\frac{1}{∣\Sigma ∣}I_{Y}.
> $$
>
> The state  $uu^{\ast }$  is the canonical example of a maximally entangled state of two registers sharing the classical state set  $\Sigma$ .

By applying this definition iteratively, one finds that each state  $\rho$  of the register  $\left(Y_{1},…,Y_{n}\right)$  uniquely determines the state of

$$
\left(Y_{k_{1}},…,Y_{k_{m}}\right),
$$

for  $k_{1},…,k_{m}$  being any choice of indices satisfying  $1\le k_{1}<⋯<k_{m}\le n$ . The state determined by this process is denoted  $\rho \left[Y_{k_{1}},…,Y_{k_{m}}\right]$  and again is called the reduction of  $\rho$  to  $\left(Y_{k_{1}},…,Y_{k_{m}}\right)$ .

The definition above may be generalized in a natural way so that it allows one to specify the states that result from removing an arbitrary collection of subregisters from a given compound register, assuming that this removal results in a valid register. For the registers described in Example 2.2, for instance, removing the subregister  $Z_{3}$  from  $X$  while it is in the state  $\rho$  would leave the resulting register in the state

$$
\left(I_{L\left(Y_{0}\right)}\otimes \left(I_{L\left(Z_{1}\right)}\otimes I_{L\left(Z_{2}\right)}\otimes Tr\right)\right)\left(\rho \right)
$$

with the understanding that the trace mapping is defined with respect to  $Z_{3}$ . The pattern represented by this example, in which identity mappings and trace mappings are tensored in accordance with the structure of the register under consideration, is generalized in the most straightforward way to other examples. While it is possible to formalize this definition in complete generality, there is little point in doing so for the purposes of this book: all of the instances of state reductions to be encountered are either cases where the reductions take the form  $\rho \left[Y_{k_{1}},…,Y_{k_{m}}\right]$  as discussed above, or are easily specified explicitly as in the case of the example (2.39) just mentioned.

Purifications of states and operators

In a variety of situations that arise in quantum information theory, wherein a given register  $X$  is being considered, it is useful to assume (or simply to imagine) that  $X$  is a subregister of a compound register  $\left(X,Y\right)$ , and to view a given state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  of  $X$  as having been obtained as a reduction

$$
\rho =\sigma \left[X\right]=Tr_{Y}\left(\sigma \right)
$$

of some state  $\sigma$  of  $\left(X,Y\right)$ . Such a state  $\sigma$  is called an **extension** of  $\rho$ . It is particularly useful to consider the case in which  $\sigma$  is a pure state, and to ask what the possible states of  $X$  are that can arise from a pure state of  $\left(X,Y\right)$  in this way. This question has a simple answer to be justified shortly: a state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  of  $X$  can arise in this way if and only if the rank of  $\rho$  does not exceed the number of classical states of the register  $Y$  removed from  $\left(X,Y\right)$  to obtain  $X$ .

The following definition is representative of the situation just described. The notion of a purification that it defines is used extensively throughout the remainder of the book.

> **Definition 2.9** Let  $X$  and  $Y$  be complex Euclidean spaces, let  $P\in Pos\left(X\right)$  be a positive semidefinite operator, and let  $u\in X\otimes Y$  be a vector. The vector  $u$  is said to be a **purification** of  $P$  if
>
> $$
> Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=P.
> $$

This definition deviates slightly from the setting described above in two respects. One is that  $P$  is not required to have unit trace, and the other is that the vector  $u$  is taken to be the object that purifies  $P$  rather than the operator  $uu^{\ast }$ . Allowing  $P$  to be an arbitrary positive semidefinite operator is a useful generalization that will cause no difficulties in developing the concept of a purification (and the term extension is generalized in a similar way), while referring to  $u$  rather than  $uu^{\ast }$  as the purification of  $P$  is simply a matter of convenience based on the specific ways that the notion is most typically used—it is also common that the operator  $uu^{\ast }$  is the object referred to as a purification.

It is straightforward to generalize the notion of a purification. One may, for instance, consider the situation in which  $X$  is a register that is obtained by removing one or more subregisters from an arbitrary compound register  $Z$ . A purification of a given state  $\rho \in D\left(X\right)$  in this context would refer to any pure state of  $Z$  whose reduction to  $X$  is equal to  $\rho$ . The most interesting aspects of purifications are, however, represented by Definition 2.9, so the remainder of the section focuses on this specific definition of purifications for simplicity. It is to be understood, however, that the various facts concerning purifications discussed extend easily and directly to a more general notion of a purification.

Conditions for the existence of purifications

The  $vec$  mapping, defined in Section 1.1.2, is useful for understanding purifications. Given that this mapping is a linear bijection from  $L\left(Y,X\right)$  to  $X\otimes Y$ , every vector  $u\in X\otimes Y$  may be written as  $u=vec\left(A\right)$  for some choice of an operator  $A\in L\left(Y,X\right)$ . By the identity (1.133), it holds that

$$
Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=Tr_{Y}\left(vec\left(A\right)vec\left(A\right)^{\ast }\right)=AA^{\ast }.
$$

This establishes an equivalence between the following statements, for a given choice of  $P\in Pos\left(X\right)$ :

1.  There exists a purification  $u\in X\otimes Y$  of  $P$ .

2.  There exists an operator  $A\in L\left(Y,X\right)$  such that  $P=AA^{\ast }$ .


The next theorem, whose proof is based on this observation, justifies the answer given above to the question on necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a purification of a given operator.

> **Theorem 2.10** Let  $X$  and  $Y$  be complex Euclidean spaces, and let  $P\in Pos\left(X\right)$  be a positive semidefinite operator. There exists a vector  $u\in X\otimes Y$  such that  $Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=P$  if and only if  $dim\left(Y\right)\ge rank\left(P\right)$ .

> **Proof** As observed above, the existence of a vector  $u\in X\otimes Y$  for which  $Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=P$  is equivalent to the existence of an operator  $A\in L\left(Y,X\right)$  satisfying  $P=AA^{\ast }$ . Under the assumption that such an operator  $A$  exists, it must hold that  $rank\left(P\right)=rank\left(A\right)$ , and therefore  $dim\left(Y\right)\ge rank\left(P\right)$ . Conversely, under the assumption  $dim\left(Y\right)\ge rank\left(P\right)$ , one may prove the existence of an operator  $A\in L\left(Y,X\right)$  satisfying  $P=AA^{\ast }$  as follows. Let  $r=rank\left(P\right)$  and use the spectral theorem (Corollary 1.4) to write
>
> $$
> P=\sum_{k=1}^{r} \lambda _{k}\left(P\right)x_{k}x_{k\ast }
> $$
>
> for  $\left{x_{1},…,x_{r}\right}\subset X$  being an orthonormal set. For an arbitrary choice of an orthonormal set  $\left{y_{1},…,y_{r}\right}\subset Y$ , which must exist by the assumption  $dim\left(Y\right)\ge rank\left(P\right)$ , the operator
>
> $$
> A=\sum_{k=1}^{r} \sqrt{\lambda _{k}\left(P\right)}x_{k}y_{k\ast }
> $$
>
> satisfies  $AA^{\ast }=P$ .

> **Corollary 2.11** Let  $X$  and  $Y$  be complex Euclidean spaces satisfying  $dim\left(Y\right)\ge dim\left(X\right)$ . For every positive semidefinite operator  $P\in Pos\left(X\right)$ , there exists a vector  $u\in X\otimes Y$  such that  $Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=P$ .

Unitary equivalence of purifications

Having established a simple condition under which a purification of a given positive semidefinite operator exists, it is natural to consider the possible relationships among different purifications of a given operator. The following theorem establishes a useful relationship between purifications that must always hold.

> **Theorem 2.12 (Unitary equivalence of purifications)** Let  $X$  and  $Y$  be complex Euclidean spaces, let  $u,v\in X\otimes Y$  be vectors, and assume that
>
> $$
> Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=Tr_{Y}\left(vv^{\ast }\right).
> $$
>
> There exists a unitary operator  $U\in U\left(Y\right)$  such that  $v=\left(I_{X}\otimes U\right)u$ .

> **Proof** Let  $A,B\in L\left(Y,X\right)$  be the unique operators satisfying  $u=vec\left(A\right)$  and  $v=vec\left(B\right)$ , and let  $P\in Pos\left(X\right)$  satisfy
>
> $$
> Tr_{Y}\left(uu^{\ast }\right)=P=Tr_{Y}\left(vv^{\ast }\right).
> $$
>
> It therefore holds that  $AA^{\ast }=P=BB^{\ast }$ . Letting  $r=rank\left(P\right)$ , it follows that  $rank\left(A\right)=r=rank\left(B\right)$ . Next, let  $x_{1},…,x_{r}\in X$  be any orthonormal sequence of eigenvectors of  $P$  with corresponding eigenvalues  $\lambda _{1}\left(P\right),…,\lambda _{r}\left(P\right)$ . As  $AA^{\ast }=P=BB^{\ast }$  it is possible to select singular value decompositions
>
> $$
> A=\sum_{k=1}^{r} \sqrt{\lambda _{k}\left(P\right)}x_{k}y_{k\ast }andB=\sum_{k=1}^{r} \sqrt{\lambda _{k}\left(P\right)}x_{k}w_{k\ast }
> $$
>
> of  $A$  and  $B$ , for some choice of orthonormal collections  $\left{y_{1},…,y_{r}\right}$  and  $\left{w_{1},…,w_{r}\right}$  of vectors in  $Y$  (as discussed in Section 1.1.3). Finally, let  $V\in U\left(Y\right)$  be any unitary operator satisfying  $Vw_{k}=y_{k}$  for every  $k\in \left{1,…,r\right}$ . It follows that  $AV=B$ , and by taking  $U=V^{\top }$  one has
>
> $$
> \left(I_{X}\otimes U\right)u=\left(I_{X}\otimes V^{\top }\right)vec\left(A\right)=vec\left(AV\right)=vec\left(B\right)=v,
> $$
>
> as required.

* * *

Would you like me to proceed with the word-for-word transcription of Section 2.2 on Quantum Channels?
